Alan_Viard_300x225	
Alan D. Viard
January 7, 2015

SHARE
Mark as favorite
Comment on Dynamic Economic Effects of a U.S. Corporate Income Tax Rate Reduction

Economics, Public Economics

Font SizeAA
Editor’s note: The following comment appeared in Pathways to Fiscal Reform in the United States, ed. John W. Diamond and George R. Zodrow (MIT Press, 2014). The comment discusses a paper in that volume, “Dynamic Economic Effects of a U.S. Corporate Income Tax Rate Reduction,” by John W. Diamond, George R. Zodrow, Thomas S. Neubig, and Robert J. Caroll.

 

Diamond, Zodrow, Neubig and Carroll (DZNC) tackle a timely and important topic, analyzing the impact on long-run output of reducing the statutory corporate income tax rate. Their results support two broad conclusions, both of which are economically plausible. First, when corporate tax rate reduction is financed by the curtailment of traditional business tax expenditures, its impact on long-run output is limited and uncertain, depending on the selection of the tax expendi­tures to be curtailed and the relative magnitudes of various economic effects that are difficult to estimate precisely. Second, corporate tax rate reduction is more likely to increase long-run output if it is financed through other means.

The authors shed valuable light on these questions by skillfully exploiting the Diamond-Zodrow computable general equilibrium model. As I have noted elsewhere (Viard 2008), the basic Diamond-Zodrow model has several features that make it well suited for the analysis of tax policy, including a general equilibrium methodology, rational expectations, a careful representation of the tax code’s key features, and separate sector detail for corporate business, noncorpo­rate business, and owner-occupied and rental housing. The version of the model DZNC used also includes important extensions that address, at least in a rudimentary fashion, above-normal returns, international capital flows, and tax avoidance. To be sure, the model still has some limitations, notably its failure to model the debt-equity decision.

Why might corporate tax rate reduction be expected to boost long-run output? The simplest reason is that rate reduction, in isolation, reduces the effective marginal tax rate on new investment. As previous authors have found and as the authors confirm, however, that potential benefit can be fully, or more than fully, offset if the rate reduction is financed by curtailment of depreciation allowances and other business tax expenditures, such as those listed in table 8.2. I will refer to rate reduction financed in that manner as “the conventional rate-reduction strategy.” DZNC’s results confirm that the conventional rate-reduction strategy can offer only limited gains. The strategy’s primary limitation is its treatment of old and new capital.

Old and New Capital

An extensive literature, beginning with Auerbach and Kotlikoff (1987), notes the fundamental economic importance of the relative treatment of old and new capital. All else equal, taxing old capital rather than new capital makes future generations better off and increases long-run output. That result is attributable to both efficiency gains, reflecting the fact that an unanticipated tax on old capital is theoretically a lump-sum tax, and intergenerational redistribution, reflecting the fact that the incidence of a tax on old capital falls on current rather than future generations.

Using the basic Diamond-Zodrow model, DZNC generally find that rate reduction has little impact on long-run output when it is financed by the curtailment of incentives that apply only to new investment. In principle, there are ways to limit the gain received by old capital. One of the authors, Zodrow (1988), has previously discussed the Treasury Department’s 1985 windfall recapture proposal, which would have imposed a tax on old capital to offset part of its gain from rate reduc­tion. And, the capital-cost recovery reform proposed by Senator Max Baucus (D-MT) in November 2013 would break with historical practice by slowing depreciation schedules for old capital, as well as new investment. In practice, though, the scope for such measures may be limited, a conclusion reinforced by the unceremonious rejection of the 1985 proposal and the uncertain prospects of the Baucus proposal.

Accordingly, the conventional rate-reduction strategy has limited potential to boost long-run output unless rate reduction offers other benefits that outweigh the strategy’s shift of the tax burden from old to new capital. As it turns out, rate reduction potentially offers several such benefits, some of which are included in the basic Diamond-Zod­row model, some of which are included in DZNC’s extension of that model, and some of which are omitted from DZNC’s model. It is unclear, however, whether those benefits are large enough for rate reduction to yield a significant net gain in long-run output.

Other Potential Benefits of Rate Reduction

As DZNC observe, the conventional rate-reduction strategy affects the economy in ways other than altering the relative treatment of old and new capital. It also alters the allocation of resources across assets and industries and between the corporate and noncorporate business sectors, the choice between debt and equity finance, the treatment of above-normal returns, and the incentive to engage in tax avoidance.

The basic Diamond-Zodrow model captures one potential long-run output gain from rate reduction: the narrowing of the distortion between corporate and noncorporate businesses. A revenue-neutral reform that curtails tax expenditures in both sectors while lowering tax rates only in the corporate sector necessarily raises taxes on the non­corporate sector and lowers taxes on the corporate sector, thereby nar­rowing the current tax system’s bias against the corporate sector. Although DZNC reasonably find that the proposals they examine offer long-run output gains through this channel, those gains are unlikely to be achieved by any tax reform plan that will ultimately be adopted in the United States. The required net tax increase on the noncorporate business sector is likely to be politically unviable because noncorporate businesses are viewed (somewhat inaccurately) as small businesses and therefore sacrosanct. Any politically viable reform plan is likely to reduce individual tax rates on noncorporate business income in order to avert a net noncorporate tax increase, thereby eliminating these gains.

DZNC usefully extend the basic Diamond-Zodrow model to include above-normal returns, which are important for understanding the effects of corporate tax rate reduction. Because above-normal returns receive smaller benefits from investment incentives than from rate reduction, the conventional rate-reduction strategy lowers the tax on above-normal returns. As DZNC observe, that fact makes the conven­tional strategy less attractive in a closed economy, in which a tax on above-normal returns raises revenue in an efficient lump-sum manner. The same conclusion would hold in an open economy under destina­tion-based taxes or origin-based taxes with proper sourcing of royalties and perfect transfer pricing. Under imperfect origin-based taxes (such as actual corporate income tax systems), however, the taxation of above-normal returns inefficiently prompts investments generating such returns to relocate abroad, making the conventional strategy more attractive. DZNC’s modeling of these phenomena is tentative and requires further refinement, but it represents a significant step forward. DZNC also extend the basic Diamond-Zodrow model to allow tax rate increases to generate accounting transactions that shift profits abroad, which they call tax rate arbitrage. Although the profit shifting does not directly affect output, it diminishes the revenue gain from a tax rate increase and thereby makes rate increases less attractive.

DZNC observe that their model omits the output gains that rate reduction can achieve by narrowing the debt-equity distortion. Although early studies concluded that the debt-equity decision was unresponsive to incentives, recent evidence points in a different direc­tion. De Mooij (2011)’s meta-analysis of nineteen empirical studies of the effect of taxes on the debt-equity choice finds that a 10 percentage point reduction in the corporate tax rate induces a decline of 2.8 per­centage points in the debt-asset ratio. Rate reduction can therefore generate significant gains by reducing the tax bias against equity.

DZNC state that their model omits another gain from the conven­tional rate-reduction strategy. In practice, though, this gain may be zero or even negative. They argue that the conventional strategy boosts output by narrowing differences in tax treatment between different assets and industries, an effect that their model cannot capture due to its lack of industry detail. As I have discussed (Viard 2009), however, making a tax base broader need not make it more neutral. The curtail­ment of some tax expenditures, such as LIFO inventory accounting, actually impedes neutrality by increasing taxes on assets that are already more heavily taxed than alternative assets. Whether the con­ventional strategy reduces or increases disparities between assets and industries cannot be resolved in the abstract, as it depends on which tax expenditures are curtailed.

In their most comprehensive simulation, as reported in table 8.4, the authors find a small net gain in long-run output from the conventional rate-reduction strategy. In a more general framework, the conventional rate-reduction strategy may either increase or reduce long-run output. Although the authors’ model omits some gains (the narrowing of the tax bias against equity) offered by the conventional strategy, it includes other gains (the narrowing of the tax bias against the corporate sector) that the strategy is unlikely to achieve in the current political environ­ment. Moreover, changes in the magnitudes of the various effects, all of which are highly uncertain, could easily change the sign of the net impact on long-run output. Given the current state of knowledge, it is difficult to do more than sketch the relevant factors and describe the range of uncertainty, as DZNC have ably done.

In summary, the conventional rate-reduction strategy may boost long-run output, but such an outcome is far from certain and any gain is unlikely to be large. Bigger and more certain gains can be achieved if rate reduction is financed in other ways. DZNC confirm this finding, but they consider a relatively limited set of financing mechanisms.

Other Ways to Pay for Rate Reduction

DZNC consider reforms in which corporate tax rate reduction is financed by wage tax increases or transfer payment reductions and find that these reforms boost long-run output. Surprisingly, they do not consider the use of consumption taxation, an approach that is likely to dominate the use of wage taxation. Whatever their economic merits, though, any of these options would be politically problematic because they would lower a tax that is (at least perceived to be) borne by the wealthy while raising taxes or cutting benefits for the broader popula­tion. They do not consider other options that offer clearer economic gains than the conventional strategy, but share its political advantage of not reducing the amount of tax collected from corporations and their investors.

One such option is to restrict the deduction for corporate interest payments, either through a percentage haircut or restrictions on highly leveraged firms. Although the interest deduction is not classified as a tax expenditure, curtailing it would reduce the current tax system’s tax bias against equity. Brill (2012), Pozen and Goodman (2012), and others have offered proposals to curtail the corporate interest deduction in the United States, and de Mooij (2011) describes similar measures adopted abroad.

An even more promising option is to reduce corporate income tax rates while increasing individual income tax rates on dividends and capital gains, effectively swapping firm-level taxes for shareholder-level taxes. Taxation at the individual level allows the tax rate on cor­porate income to be tailored to the shareholder’s ability to pay, permitting greater progressivity. A shift to taxation at the individual level offers additional benefits in a global economy. Unlike corporate income taxes, shareholder-level taxes tied to the shareholder’s country of residence do not encourage corporations to invest or shift profits abroad and do not disadvantage domestic-chartered corporations relative to foreign-chartered corporations. Grubert and Altshuler (2008), Altshuler, Harris, and Toder (2010), Graetz (2011), Sullivan (2011), Viard (2013), and Gravelle (2014) discuss the economic advantages of shifting the taxation of corporate income toward the shareholder level. This option has also drawn attention in the current policy debate, winning support from Yglesias (2013), Pethokoukis (2013), Barro (2013), and Salam (2013).

Shareholder-level taxation poses some challenges. To ensure that retained corporate earnings do not escape tax, it may be necessary to tax shareholders on an accrual basis, a strategy that income taxation may have to embrace in any event in response to taxpayers’ manipula­tion of realization and basis rules. DZNC’s model could be used to analyze some of the effects of a move toward shareholder-level taxation.

Conclusion

DZNC’s results confirm that corporate tax rate reduction financed by the curtailment of traditional business tax expenditures offers uncer­tain and modest economic gains. Both policymakers and economic modelers should focus greater attention on proposals to finance corpo­rate tax rate reduction by restricting the corporate interest deduction or by increasing shareholder taxes on corporate income.

References

Altshuler, Rosanne, Benjamin H. Harris, and Eric Toder. 2010. Capital Income Taxation and Progressivity in a Global Economy. Virginia Tax Review 30 (2): 355–88.

Auerbach, Alan J., and Laurence J. Kotlikoff. 1987. Dynamic Fiscal Policy. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Barro, Josh. 2013. Don’t Tax Apple, Tax Its Shareholders. Bloomberg, May 24. http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2013-05-24/don-t-tax-apple-tax-its-shareholders.html.

Brill, Alex. 2012. A pro-Growth, Progressive, and Practical Proposal to Cut Business Tax Rates. AEI Tax Policy Outlook, no. 1 (January). http://www.aei.org/files/2012/02/10/-a-progrowth-progressive-and-practical-plan-to-cut-business-tax-rates_13472858147.pdf.

De Mooij, Ruud. 2011. The Tax Elasticity of corporate debt: A Synthesis of Size and Varia­tions. International Monetary Fund Working Paper 11/95. http://www.imf.org/exter­nal/pubs/ft/wp/2011/wp1195.pdf.

Graetz, Michael M. 2011. Testimony before the Senate Finance Committee, March 8. http://www.finance.senate.gov/imo/media/doc/030811%20mg%20test.pdf.

Gravelle, Jane. 2014. Corporate Tax Reform: Issues for Congress. Congressional Research Service Report RL34229. http://www.ctj.org/pdf/crscorporatetaxreformissuesforcon­gress.pdf.

Grubert, Harry, and Rosanne Altshuler. 2008. Corporate Taxes in the World Economy: Reforming the Taxation of Cross-Border Income. In Fundamental Tax Reform: Issues, Choices and Implications, edited by John W. Diamond and George R. Zodrow, 319–54. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Pethokoukis, James. 2013. What Tim Cook Should Say: Tax Me More, Apple Not at All. AEIdeas, May 21. http://www.aei-ideas.org/2013/05/what-tim-cook-should-say-tax-me-more-apple-not-at-all/.

Pozen, Robert C., and Lucas W. Goodman. 2012. Capping the Deductibility of Corporate Interest Expense. Tax Notes 137 (11): 1207–24.

Salam, Reihan. 2013. A Schumpterian Reason to Replace Corporate Income Taxes with Higher Capital Income Taxes on Individuals. National Review Online, the Agenda, May 22. http://www.nationalreview.com/agenda/349052/schumpeterian-reason-replace-corporate-income-taxes-higher-capital-income-taxes.

Sullivan, Martin. 2011. Corporate Tax Reform: Time to Think outside the Box. Tax Notes 130 (13): 1513–17.

Viard, Alan D. 2008. Discussion. In Fundamental Tax Reform: Issues, Choices and Impli­cations, edited by John W. Diamond and George R. Zodrow, 319–54. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Viard, Alan D. 2009. Two Cheers for Corporate Tax Base Broadening. National Tax Journal 62 (3): 399–412.

Viard, Alan D. 2013. PPL: Exposing the flaws of the foreign tax credit. Tax Notes 138 (5): 553–66.

Yglesias, Matthew. 2013. Scrap the Corporate Income tax. Slate, Moneybox, April 9. http://www.slate.com/articles/business/moneybox/2013/04/corporate_income_tax_reform_it_s_not_possible_we_should_just_get_rid_of.html.

Zodrow, George R. 1988. The Windfall Recapture Tax: Issues of Theory and Design. Public Finance Quarterly 16 (4): 387–424.

Corporate tax rateFiscal policyThe Ledger
Discussion: (0 comments)

There are no comments available.

Leave a comment: